Internal cross-references MEP (#10)
executablebooks/myst-enhancement-proposals: docs/meps/mep-0002.md

These schemes are used to indicate that the link should be resolved by MyST specific logic, and follows standard [URI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) syntax:

```text
URI = scheme ":" pathname ["?" query] ["#" fragment]
```

In most cases, as seen in the summary above the scheme is optional and can be inferred safely by the context.
The exception is when _explicitly_ referring to an external MyST site, Jupyter Book or Sphinx documentation site.
These URIs can be safely and easily parsed by any common URL parser. For example in Javascript:

```js
const url = new URL('project:target.md#my-ref');
url.protocol; // "project:"
url.pathname; // "target.md"
url.hash; // "#my-ref"
```

The following links and references are supported:

| Link Type                | Auto Link                  | Inline                    |
| :----------------------- | :------------------------- | :------------------------ |
| External URL             | `<https://example.com>`    | `[](https://example.com)` |
| Local file download      | `<path:file.txt>`          | `[](file.txt)`            |
| File download (explicit) | `<path:file.md>`           | `[](path:file.md)`        |

> | Project document         | `<project:file.md>`        | `[](file.md)`             |

Reviewer: from the table here I found some of the ambiguity confusing. The syntax is fine though, it was just the way it was expressed in the MEP -- but reading on, the Downloads section below does make it clearer what is going on between  `[](path:file.md)` and `[](file.md)` which is (i) download file that is also in the TOC and (ii) link to a file in the TOC(?)

So I think that is fine.

- Downloads can be specified explicitly by a `<path:my-file.md>`, which will revert to a download regardless of the extension. (i.e. this overrides the default for `[](my-file.md)`, which is `<project:my-file.md>`).

### Warnings and Errors

`xref_missing`
: There is a missing reference, that could not be found.

`xref_implicit`
: You are referencing an implicit reference which could change easily in the future, consider making this explicit.

`xref_unsupported`
: Raised if the the current environment does not support the reference look up. For example, single page builds.

`xref_ambiguous`
: Raised when multiple conflicting targets are matched.

`xref_legacy`
: Raised when a `[](ref)` is used in place of `[](#ref)`.
: For example, "Legacy syntax used for link target, please prepend a '#' to your link url: "{link.url}" in "{document}".

### Specification AST

The links should follow the [link AST](https://www.myst.tools/docs/spec/myst-schema#link) for external links.
For internal project cross-references, these should be resolved to a `crossReference` node ([spec](https://www.myst.tools/docs/spec/myst-schema#crossreference)).

> For external project links, these extend the link object with additional data that includes the url source (`urlSource`), the scheme name (e.g. `project` or `download`), whether the link is internal (e.g. `false`), and additional optional metadata about the page that may be helpful to a renderer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For external project links, we will extend the link object with additional data that includes the url source (`urlSource`), the scheme name (e.g. `project` or `download`), whether the link is internal (e.g. `false`), and additional optional metadata about the page that may be helpful to a renderer.
A prototype of this extended link type is currently defined in [myst-transforms](https://github.com/executablebooks/mystjs/blob/327c19c75c2f743e9f0736586b5232a45e00123e/packages/myst-transforms/src/links/types.ts#L4-L10).
```

| Local file download      | `<path:file.txt>`          | `[](file.txt)`            |
| File download (explicit) | `<path:file.md>`           | `[](path:file.md)`        |
| Project document         | `<project:file.md>`        | `[](file.md)`             |
| Target in a document     | `<project:target.md#file>` | `[](file.md#target)`      |
| Target in project        | `<project:#target>`        | `[](#target)`             |

### Search Order and Specificity

All references search the local document first[^specific_doc], then the local project in the order of the table of contents. A `xref_ambiguous` warning is raised if multiple matches are found.

[^specific_doc]: With the exception of an explicit reference to a specific page, i.e. `[](./examples/my-doc.md#explicit-reference)`

In large documentation sites, a referenced target can be present in multiple documents, in that case, the parser will emit a `xref_ambiguous` warning letting you know that there are multiple matches for the intended target.
If a link cannot be resolved, an external link should be rendered, for example, `<a href="#target">#target</a>`.

### Implicit Section Headers

> We suggest a configuration option to create anchor "slugs" for section headers, which stay close to the [GitHub implementation](https://github.com/Flet/github-slugger), which produces references that:

Author: Done!

A prototype of this extended link type is currently defined in [myst-transforms](https://github.com/executablebooks/mystjs/blob/327c19c75c2f743e9f0736586b5232a45e00123e/packages/myst-transforms/src/links/types.ts#L4-L10).

## Extensibility

We hope that this syntax will be helpful in simplifying the cross-reference experience in MyST.
Additionally, we believe that the scheme/protocol extension point is a powerful way to add rich cross-referencing ability to other types of structured data sources.
We expect a future MEP to introduce additional logic to resolve intersphinx references, and other structured data.
For example, one could imagine a `<wiki:Gravitational_Waves>` extension that cross-references pages in Wikipedia, or a `<doi:10.5281/zenodo.6476040>` extension that adds additional information about DOIs.
For simple link replacements, this syntax could also be extended with simple configuration options, similar to the `extlinks` feature in Sphinx ([see documentation](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/extlinks.html)).

## UX implications & migration

All of the syntax is CommonMark compliant and introduces new capabilities to resolve cross references.

> All existing roles are being maintained for the forseeable future.

Author: I have changed "foreseeable future" --> "indefinitely" and highlighted the compatibility with existing content and Sphinx as the reasons there.

The goal of this MEP is to simplify the amount of things that a user needs to learn before they are up and running with all of the cross-references, and it is designed to not break backwards compatibility with Sphinx roles. To that end I think leaving discretion up to various packages (e.g. jupyter-book, mystjs, myst-parser) on how they introduce these concepts is OK for now (e.g. implementations based on Sphinx may want to document things differently for their users who are familiar with RST).

It is a bit weaker than what you suggest @fperez, but that is probably ok for our first MEP. :)

Updated text:

> All existing roles are being maintained indefinitely to ensure compatibility with existing content as well as long-term compatibility with Sphinx. We suggest that documentation is updated to highlight the new, consistent markdown-link references with the old styles being moved to compatibility sections.

> All existing roles are being maintained for the forseeable future.

Reviewer 3: Perfect, thanks!!

  - If a `{number}` is used and the node is not enumerated, the `{number}` will be replaced by "??" and a warning raised.

- Reference text (`{name}`)
  - Any node can include the text of a reference including any styles (e.g. Sections are the section title; Figures and Tables are the caption).
  - If `{name}` is used and the node does not have an explicit name or title, the node reference label will be used.

In both cases, the template can be escaped with a preceding backslash, that is `\{number}` or `\{name}`, and the text will not be replaced.

#### `link`

The links are defined by a scheme, which can be standard protocols (`http:`, `mailto:`).
Here we propose two new schemes, `project` and `path`:
the `project` scheme allows for cross-referencing pages, sections, equations, figures, or other components of a MyST project;
the `path` scheme allows for referencing files outside of the project or explicitly downloading the source of a document in the project.
The schemes are an extensibility point specifically described by [CommonMark](https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/#example-598)

> and are used to indicate that the link should be resolved by MyST specific logic, and follows standard [URI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) syntax:

Reviewer 2: Just a tiny grammar comment, otherwise the new text seems good.

```suggestion
and are used to indicate that the link should be resolved by MyST specific logic. They follow standard [URI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) syntax:
```

Author: Thanks. :)

The links should follow the [link AST](https://www.myst.tools/docs/spec/myst-schema#link) for external links.
For internal project cross-references, these should be resolved to a `crossReference` node ([spec](https://www.myst.tools/docs/spec/myst-schema#crossreference)).

For external project links, we will extend the link object with additional data that includes the url source (`urlSource`), the scheme name (e.g. `project` or `download`), whether the link is internal (e.g. `false`), and additional optional metadata about the page that may be helpful to a renderer.

> A prototype of this extended link type is currently defined in [myst-transforms](https://github.com/executablebooks/mystjs/blob/327c19c75c2f743e9f0736586b5232a45e00123e/packages/myst-transforms/src/links/types.ts#L4-L10).

Reviewer 4: I would rather this went in the reference section, since it is mentioning an implementation and not a spec. Bit it’s not the end of the world

Reviewer 4: It’s probably better to just copy the actual « spec proposal » here

Author: Yeah, agreed. Moved to the references!
